Howdy.
I'm Daniel Delwood,
and this is Getting Started with
Instruments.
So today we're going to talk about
instruments and try to take you
from zero to 60 with using the
tool so that you can go out and
improve your existing Mac and iPhone
applications and really get the best
performance and efficiency out of them.
So starting off,
what are we going to talk about today?
Well, first of all, what is instruments?
We'll talk about when to use it.
And then we'll go on to talk about
some key examples or key elements in
instruments that you need to understand.
And then we'll use those in
an example workflow demo.
And then we'll go on to actually
diagnose an existing performance
problem using sampling technologies.
And then finally, Lynn will come up to
talk about memory tools,
analyzing dispatch,
and some other features we don't
have time to fully cover today.
So first of all, what is Instruments?
Well, Instruments is a powerful,
convenient,
and flexible meta-analysis tool
with the simplicity of an IAP.
Now, I know that sounds like
a lot of a mouthful,
but what I want you to understand
is that it's an analysis tool,
not just a performance tool.
So you can look into the
behavior of your application,
as well as gather performance
metrics such as CPU usage,
memory usage, etc.
Now, by simplicity,
what we've tried to do is put a
unifying user interface on top of
analyzing both the Mac and the iPhone.
And so, while we're going to talk
exclusively about Mac in these sets,
in these examples, in these demos,
everything we talk about today is
directly applicable to the iPhone,
and will be necessary for understanding
lots of the stuff later on this
week in the iPhone-specific talks.
So first of all,
when would you use Instruments?
Well,
if your application is performing badly,
if it's spinning,
you may want to find out
what's taking the time,
what part of your code is responsible.
What files is your application
accessing during an operation?
This is a behavioral question
that you can also ask.
Maybe it's when you click a button.
Maybe you're interested in
files accessed on launch.
Is your application leaking memory?
When or how much is your method called?
Again, it's also about behavior analysis.
Is your application causing
lots of paging on the system?
Or maybe it's just time to optimize
and you want to get that low-hanging
fruit to get your performance
up and a better running app.
So Instruments can help with these
because of the following characteristics.
First of all,
it's got event-driven profiling.
And this is where you really sort
of cast out your net and say,
I'm interested in certain events.
And instead of polling for those events,
Instruments waits for them to happen
and reports them instantly to you.
There's live analysis,
which allows you to both run
instruments and your target
application at the same time,
and really interact with both.
So if you want to click a button and
see what happens and analyze the data,
you can do that.
We've got time correlation,
so you can see different types
of data in time and see when they
happened corresponding to each other.
We've got many powerful data
mining abilities for you to
really dig in and find out what
part of your code is responsible.
And the whole goal of all of this is to
streamline your workflow so that you can
very quickly move from editing in Xcode,
building, analyzing,
finding out what your problems are,
and fixing, and really just completing
the cycle there.
Lastly, Instruments harnesses
the power of DTrace.
And you may have heard
of this technology.
It was introduced in Leopard.
And it's a very, very cool thing.
Now, what is DTrace?
Well, it's a dynamic tracing
framework originally developed
by our friends at Sun.
Now, by dynamic,
this means that you don't
have to recompile your code.
You can instrument any running code.
So this can be debug, release, anything.
The idea is that DTrace
is based on probes.
And these probes you can
specify at different points,
whether that's a system call
or the beginning of a function
or the end of a function.
Very flexible.
And when the event occurs,
these probes fire.
When they fire,
they execute script actions,
and these can be very powerful
things like gathering a backtrace.
You can find out the parameters to
the function that you're probing.
And it's just overall very powerful.
And what we've tried to do is
bring that to you in Instruments,
letting you use the power of DTrace
without having to understand descripting.
Although if you do
understand descripting,
you can build your own custom
instruments and go from there.
If you'd like to learn more
about DTrace on Mac OS X,
there's a session later on this week.
So let's talk about some instrumentation.
Well, first of all,
built on top of the Darwin Foundation,
we've got lots of instruments
built on the OS X framework,
such as lots of memory tools,
which we'll talk about later,
sampling tools to find out where your
application is spending its time.
And then very specific tools,
such as the OpenGL driver monitor or
the user interface event recorder.
And then finally,
on top of the power of DTrace,
there's a lot of tools
such as file activity,
instruments, garbage collection,
statistics that you can get, and also,
like I said, you can build your own
DTrace-based instruments.
I've been talking a lot
about what instruments is.
What are some of the key elements you
should understand before using this?
When you start up instruments,
the first thing you'll see
is the trace templates.
These are task starting points.
So the idea is when you
usually launch this tool,
you've got a question,
an idea in mind that you want to solve.
If you're looking for leaks,
there's a trace template for that.
And maybe you're just curious
about the performance of core
data in your application.
So these are very targeted templates
to give you a starting point to
the questions you may want to ask.
I've mentioned an instrument many times,
and what is it?
Well, it's really a tool
that just gathers data.
Now, this is analogous to a
doctor's stethoscope,
which you'd use to find out the
behavior and really diagnose
what's going on with your heart.
And in Instruments,
we've got lots of things,
such as this file activity instrument,
which records open, close,
and stat operations,
and lets you dig into those.
Now, where do you get the instruments?
We've got a library,
and this lists all of
our instrumentation.
So if you're interested in sampling,
there's tools for that.
There's memory tools.
And with the search field,
you can quickly filter down
to what you're interested in.
Say you're interested in everything
that has to do with files.
You can find those.
And finally, they're sorted by category.
So if you're not exactly sure
what the instrument's called,
and you need to take a look
at the categories and see what
type of data you're looking for,
you can find those too.
So, all right.
The trace document is where all your
instruments and data really gets stored.
And so,
as with most document-based applications,
this is the thing that you will
spend most of your time dealing with,
that you can save,
that you can mail off to
your fellow developers.
And there's a couple parts
of it I'd like to call out.
First of all, the track view, which,
like I said earlier,
gives you time-correlated data,
sort of a high-level overview over
what type of data you're gathering.
And then if you're really
trying to dive in and analyze,
there's the detail views at the bottom.
And this is where all of the data is
organized in three different views,
the table view, the outline view,
and the diagram view.
So, all right, I've told you about lots
of the key elements.
Let's see these together
in just an example workflow
demo and put them together.
So,
I'm going to go over to the demo machine.
And I'm just going to
fire up Instruments.
So -- oh, other one.
So I just launched Instruments,
and you can see the
template chooser comes up.
And there's a bunch of
different things I can choose.
I can choose leaks or core data.
And there's also
iPhone-specific templates,
such as the core animation template
and the OpenGL ES template.
And you can create your
own user templates.
But for now, I'm just going to select
blank and hit choose.
And I'm at a blank trace document.
Well,
what's the first thing I want to do?
I want to ask myself what
data I'm interested in,
and in this case,
I'm just going to start recording Sketch.
I'm interested in how
Sketch saves its documents.
Does it use the AppKit document model?
Maybe I just want to backtrace.
So, starting from here,
I'm going to start by going to
the toolbar and selecting the
library and typing in "file."
So here are all the instruments
that deal with files.
I'll bring the file activity instrument
and apply it to my trace document.
Drag and drop.
But since we can record
multiple types of data at once,
I'll also select the CPU monitor,
which is a lot like what
you'd see in Activity Monitor.
Oops.
All the way.
And I'll go ahead and look
for user interface recorder.
Now, this will allow me to find out
when the file activities happened
while viewing at the same time
what I did in the user interface.
All right,
so I've answered the first question,
what do I want to record?
Second question is,
where do I want to get the data from?
Now, from the toolbar,
there's this target chooser,
and I can either attach
to a running process,
or I can launch an executable.
In this case, I'll launch Sketch.
So I hit record.
And Sketch immediately launches an
instrument and starts recording data.
I'm going to move Sketch over
so you can see that it's already
gathering data in the background.
And I'm just going to do something
interesting by drawing two rectangles.
Fun.
And I'll hit command S.
And you'll notice in the background
that my command S was recorded
by the user interface recorder.
I'll type in test, save it to my desktop,
and replace.
And there we go.
So I'll go ahead and quit my
application and take a look at the data.
And first off,
you can see in the track view
when the file activities occurred.
And so I'll go ahead and
click on file activity.
And you can see in the detail view
that the data is updated to show
me a lot of detailed information,
such as when I open info P lists,
and if I'm interested in even
more data about a specific event,
I can bring in the extended
detail view from the toolbar.
[Transcript missing]
Now, since I'm interested in, well,
the test document I saved out,
I'm going to go to the filter box
in the bottom and type in test.
And it immediately filters
down to the saving of my file.
And if we take a look
at the stack trace here,
we see, well, first at the top,
that the file descriptor is 19.
And it looks like we are using
the NSDocumentController model.
Very cool.
All right.
So we've looked at some of the
behavior of our application.
But sometimes it's not
necessarily that simple.
You may have a bug that
reproduces one in five times,
or you may want to go back,
change your code, and then run the same
trace document against it.
Well, the user interface recorder
doesn't just record what I did,
but it allows me to play them back.
So if you've noticed that the
record button in the top left
now says drive and record,
I can click it,
and it's going to repeat what I did,
even though I'm not actually
touching the machine.
So it goes over,
it's going to draw my boxes for me.
And it's gathering other
data in the background,
the file activity in the CPU monitor.
All the while,
my user interface recorder is replaying
the events from the first run.
So there we go.
The idea is really to
simplify your workflow.
I'm gonna go ahead and
go back to the slides.
So what are we talking about here?
Well, the idea is really to get you
familiar with setting up a trace
document and using instruments by
first asking what data do you want?
This helps you decide what type
of instrumentation you want
to use and really filter down
to exactly that problem set.
Second, what are you going to target?
This, in our case, was Sketch,
but this gives you the
context for your trace,
whether it's all processes on the system,
a single launch process,
or a process that's already running.
And finally,
the goal of all this is just to simplify
your workflow by giving you this record,
iterate, and repeat model.
The whole goal, to take you from this,
a blank template, to this,
where all your data is right
at your fingertips and you
can solve your problem.
So cool, we did a workflow demo,
and you saw how to use Instruments,
but let's use it to solve an
existing performance problem.
So for sampling,
this is a very common technology to use
to find out why an application is running
slow and where it's spending its time.
So I'm going to go back
to the demo machine here.
and open up a project
called Image Enhance.
And so I'll just build and run
this and explain what it does.
The idea here is that you've got
a lot of low contrast images,
and you'd like to improve them.
And I'll just select some images.
You can see that they're
not all that great.
The rail in the bottom
left is hardly visible.
This one's just horrible.
And they really could be improved.
And so you've heard of
histogram equalization.
It's a two-pass algorithm
that's very common.
And while you could use
preexisting implementations of it,
you'd like to try
implementing it yourself,
perhaps make some modifications,
and see how fast it runs.
Unfortunately, in this case,
it runs really ridiculously slow.
So let's go ahead and sample this
and figure out what's going on.
So right with an Xcode,
instead of just running,
I can go up to the Run menu,
and there's a Start with
Performance tool item.
And this allows me to choose any of the
Instruments templates that I've created.
So I'll use the CPU Sampler template,
and my application launches
right into Instruments.
It starts recording, and here it is.
And I'll go ahead and get it
processing so we can see some data.
So right as I opened the files,
you could see there was a spike in
CPU usage as it loaded all those files.
And I can hit enhance and
it starts chugging away.
So I'll just leave
that in the background.
So, Sampler, in the track view,
shows me the CPU usage of
this one single application.
And in the detail view,
it shows me lots of the
sample data I've collected.
And what Sampler does is it takes
backtraces of your application,
of all the threads,
and it then aggregates these
so that you can find out
what's spending the most time.
So, in this case,
I've got a call tree that's showing
me that most of the time I'm just
sitting in a Mach message trap.
Well, that's interesting,
but I really want to see
sort of the top-down,
high-level view of what
my application's doing.
So, I'll go ahead and choose
to uninvert the call tree,
and I'll talk a little bit more
about what this does later.
But there's a lot of options on the left,
and really geared toward
data mining your data.
So here you can see that we're taking
samples of every single thread.
And since I'm really interested
in focusing on the operations
that are running on the CPU and
getting my CPU usage down,
I'm going to select running
sample times instead of sample
counts from my perspective.
And again, we'll talk a bit more
about what this does later.
But it shows that my enhanced operations,
in this case we're using
NSOperationQueue to do our work,
my enhanced operations are
taking the majority of the time.
And if I want to see exactly how,
I can bring in the extended detail
view to take a look at the stack.
So here we go.
We've got a bunch of frames.
It says that NSOperationStart is
calling EnhanceOperationMain.
And I'm just going to stop the app,
give our poor little computer a break.
So main is calling enhance.
Enhance is calling gather pixel counts.
And that's calling into
NSBitmap image rep,
git pixel at xy.
So I can go ahead and select my code,
and I can even double click
to go directly there in Xcode.
And so here's my gather pixel
counts for image rep function.
And it looks like what we're doing
is the first pass in our two pass
algorithm by looping through all the
pixels and getting the brightness value.
However, when we call git pixel at xy,
it seems to be quite slow.
Why is that?
Well, instruments from this trace,
we can see that we're
gathering an app kit lock,
a recursive lock every single
time we make this call.
Since our usage case here is that we're
looping through every single pixel,
we can probably do better.
So I'm going to open up some
code so I don't actually have
to write it for you on stage.
And what we're going to do here is we're
going to gather our raw bitmap data right
before the loop by calling bitmap data.
And then, instead of gathering the
brightness by calling getPixelAtXY,
We will use that data that we
gathered just a minute ago.
All right, so we save,
go up to the Build menu,
and select Build and Go.
And what it does is it launches
right back into the same
document we were working with.
Again, to simplify the workflow.
So I'll choose images,
I'll say enhance them.
Whoa!
The first half was very, very fast.
And that's what we're looking for.
But the second half is still slow.
And so this is all about really
iterating and finding the performance
problems that are taking the most time.
So if I go back to Instruments,
we can take a look at the sample here.
Again, it looks like we're
calling git pixel at xy.
Well,
we're actually calling color at xy first,
and that calls git pixel at xy.
Where is this?
If I double click on the frame,
it takes me directly to the code.
And I can see this is the second
part of the 2Pass algorithm.
Well,
I should probably do the same thing.
So from here,
I simply get the raw image data.
And instead of calculating
the new color like that,
I'll use the new data.
This data pointer right here.
Okay, so I save, go up, build and go,
and launch it back into the
same Instruments template.
So let's see how we did.
Choose some images.
Hit enhance, and wow, there we go.
In fact, we'll probably even get to see
some better contrast images here.
So that one's much better.
You can see the bar on the lower left.
And this, this is a whole lot better.
So we've succeeded in
improving our performance.
All right, so back to the slides.
So let's talk a little
bit more about sampling.
First off, like I said,
it's a technique to gather
backtraces for all of your
threads at a given time interval.
And it gets all of the threads
that are in your application.
The idea is it's a statistical profiling,
not a function profiling.
And so if you have very short calls or
calls that you make very infrequently,
they may not show up
in the sample because,
well,
they're not taking your application.
So you can't do that.
So we're going to talk about
how you can use this tool to
gather backtraces for all of your
threads at a given time interval.
The idea is to find
hot spots in your code.
And the whole goal here is to tell what
your application spends its time doing.
Or possibly what it's not doing.
And so if you're in blocking reads
or perhaps you're waiting on a lock,
you can find out what threads
are waiting on and really
trace that back to its source.
So all right, there are a lot of
options there on the left.
Let's talk about a couple of
them that are the most useful.
First of all,
if we've got a sample here of, let's say,
your application Sketch,
You can see that a lot of the frames
are from AppKit and from HIToolbox,
and you're kind of
interested in your code.
So one frame here is
NSApplicationHandleKeyEquivalent,
which probably is going
to call into your code,
but it'd take a little
bit of digging to find.
And SKTGraphicViewMouseDown is your code.
This is the sort of thing
you're interested in.
So by using the data mining
abilities of Hyde system libraries,
you can get those all out of your way and
go directly to what you're looking for.
So, sample perspective.
Now,
I toggled this from all sample counts
to running sample times during the demo.
What does it do?
Like I said,
sampling gets backtraces of all
the threads in your application,
whether they're running on the
CPU or whether they're not.
So if you're interested in finding
out where your thread states are,
then you probably want
to leave it that way.
You want to have all sample counts on.
So if you have six threads,
and these four are blocked,
and these two are running on your cores,
then it'll show you all six,
and you can see where they're blocked.
Now, if you're interested only
in the two that are running,
and you really want to optimize the
time that you're spending on your CPU,
you can switch this over
to running sample times.
And the idea is that you
can find out which ones are
executing and optimize there.
Again,
the idea is blocked versus running.
Counts for blocked threads,
set it to running sample
times for running threads.
Okay, so what does that look like?
Well, with this example sketch
sample that we have here,
You can see that SKT Graphic View,
mouse down, and SKT Graphic View,
draw rect,
took about the same wall clock time.
They had about 160, 170 samples.
So this means that
From the perspective of Sampler,
they were about the same.
However, when we switched this
to running sample times,
we quickly see that draw_rect
spent about three times running
on the CPU that mouse_down did.
So this means mouse_down was blocked
a bit more and that draw_rect
really was doing more work.
This is probably where we want to
spend our first time optimizing.
Last thing, call tree inversion.
Let's talk about call trees a little bit.
You've got your function
that does something.
And it takes 800 milliseconds.
Well, the call tree shows what your
application -- or excuse me,
what that doing something frame called.
And you can see how the
time is broken down.
And it's sort of the top-down view.
So when you have call
tree and version off,
you're asking where was overall time
spent and what did my code call?
Now, if we're interested in sort
of the hotspots in your code,
perhaps what should I optimize first,
you can see in this example that the
red circles are taking a lot of time,
and if we added them together,
we'd probably see that we
wanted to look at them first.
Well, we can turn Caltree Inversion on
and flip all of that upside down.
It coalesces the leaf frames
and allows you to find the
individual hotspots in your code,
and also ask the question,
what called those hotspots?
So let's have a concrete example of this.
Again, with the sketch example we had,
with inversion on,
you can quickly see at top that
SKT Graphic View Draw Contents in View,
at least for this sample,
was taking the most
time running on our CPU,
1,450 milliseconds.
And also interesting is that right
below it is SKT Graphic View Draw Rect,
which was where it was
called from most of the time.
So, all right, that's sampling.
I'd like to ask Lynn to come
up to talk about memory tools.
Thank you, Daniel.
So now that we've seen how to use
Sampler to find hotspots in our
code in order to optimize them,
let's move on and let's talk about
a new type of performance problem,
namely memory management.
Now,
regardless of whether you're programming
for the iPhone or for the Mac,
memory is a limited resource.
And as such, it's very important to
manage it efficiently.
But you might find yourself faced
with some common memory issues
that prevent you from doing that.
First is leaked memory.
This occurs when your program
unintentionally fails to free a region
of memory when it's done using it.
Now, as regions of leaked memory accrue,
this could reduce your performance
due to paging to your disk.
Second is having a
large memory footprint.
Now,
your goal when you're doing efficient
memory management is to keep the
working set of your memory down in order
to increase the performance of your
application and prevent paging to disk,
which would, in fact,
reduce this performance.
And that's why you should avoid
having a large memory footprint.
Third of all is pointers
to freed objects.
This can cause many problems.
For example, your system crashing or your
application crashing when you
send a message to a freed object.
Fourth,
and this is a more subtle problem,
is dynamic memory usage.
Now, allocating and deallocating
small regions of memory,
or just allocating and deallocating,
incurs a certain overhead.
And if you're doing this continuously,
so you're allocating and
deallocating small regions of memory,
this overheads can accrue and
cause performance problems.
What you really want to be doing is
allocating a large region of memory
and then freeing it when you're done.
Amen.
And finally, for garbage collected code,
your garbage collector might fail to
collect a certain object in a timely
fashion if it has a lot of unnecessary
references to it from other objects.
And this is called over-rootedness,
and you want to try to avoid that.
Five memory problems.
Three of these are very
pertinent to the iPhone.
Since you're working
with a smaller memory,
leaked memory, large footprint,
and dynamic memory usage become
very noticeable on the iPhone,
so you want to try to avoid them.
All right.
So we've talked about all these problems,
and your question is, well,
since finding these
problems is non-trivial,
how do you go about finding
them in the first place?
Well, Instruments tries to simplify
that process for you by providing
you with the necessary tools.
First of all,
we have the object alloc instrument.
And this is a very powerful instrument
in the sense that it tracks all
of the memory allocations that
are performed by your application.
And it keeps detailed addresses.
And it's useful for finding programs
with a large memory footprint
and which objects are responsible
for causing this large footprint.
And it helps you find pointers to freed
objects and why your -- whether your
application is using memory dynamically.
You can also use it to find
things such as over-released
or over-retained objects.
Second is the Leaks Instrument,
which does precisely
what its name suggests,
which is checking for unreferenced
memory blocks in your code.
Now, if you're interested in higher
level statistics for your processes,
like for example,
the size of the virtual and real
memories or when your process
is paging in and paging out,
you will need to use the
memory monitor instrument.
And since you are more intimately
knowledgeable about your code,
you might have that one
particular memory problem that
you're trying to find and solve.
Now,
Instruments is powerful in a sense that
it allows you to create your own custom
DTrace instruments that are tailored for
finding that particular memory problem.
For example,
you can create a custom DTrace
instrument that will tell you
when NS Auto Release Pools
are created or freed.
And you can also create an instrument
that will tell you when certain
regions of data are mapped and unmapped
from your process address space.
Finally, and this is new in Xcode 3.1,
we've introduced the
Object Graph Instrument.
Now, for garbage collected code,
it helps you visualize directed cyclic
graphs of memory block references.
What this means is that it helps
you find those objects that have
unnecessary references to them
that will prevent them from getting
garbage collected in a timely manner.
All right.
Let's talk a little bit more
about the ObjectAlloc instrument.
So ObjectAlloc doesn't only
keep track of objects that
your application has allocated,
but all regions of memory that have
been allocated by your application.
It also keeps track of pointer histories.
For example, it keeps track of when an
object has been malloc'd,
freed, retained, released,
or auto-released.
And it also keeps track of higher
level statistics about certain types
and certain classes of objects.
For example, for the class NSString,
it will tell you about all the
NSString objects that have been
allocated by your application
versus the net objects that
have been allocated and freed.
It also keeps track of call trees for
when your objects have been allocated,
retained, and freed,
and it works with garbage
collected applications.
A little bit more about leaks.
Now,
leaks is a static memory analysis tool,
which means it's going to suspend your
process and it's going to go through
all the memory regions in order to find
the ones which have been unreferenced,
in order to find the
unreferenced memory regions.
And it works alongside the
ObjectAlloc instrument,
because ObjectAlloc provides leaks
with the necessary pointer histories
so that you can find the harder,
more insidious leaks in your code.
And this is not for garbage collection.
So, now that we've talked
about what these tools are,
let's see them in action.
Switch over to the demo machine.
All right, so I'm going to actually use
my leaks instrument to try to
find leaks in my application,
Image Enhance.
First of all,
I'm going to launch it from Xcode.
I'll just open it up in Xcode.
And then I'm going to go
down and start Instruments.
So the first thing I see, once again,
is the template chooser.
And what I want to do
is I want to go up here,
select the leaks template,
and hit Choose.
Now, as you can see,
the leaks template added two
instruments to my trace document,
the ObjectAlloc instrument and leaks.
And as I've said before,
ObjectAlloc is needed to provide
you with pointer histories
about the leaked objects.
So up here,
I'm going to choose my target process.
I'm going to choose executable,
and I'm going to go back and
find my target application.
Which I'm guessing hasn't been built yet.
All right, let me go to Xcode and
launch it from there.
Okay, so from Xcode,
I'm going to hit Run and
start with Performance Tool.
I'm going to select the Leaks template.
And there we go.
So here's my application, Image Enhance.
And let me talk about what you can
see over here in the trace document
for the object alloc instrument.
Up here in the track view,
I'm plotting the total objects
that have been allocated,
sorry, the total bytes that have been
allocated by my application.
And in this case,
it's been about 776 kilobytes.
Down here in my detail views,
the first detail view I'm
looking at is the table view.
And as you can see,
it shows me certain statistics
about my different types of classes.
For example, for CFString,
I can see the net bytes allocated versus
the net bytes in proportion to the
overall bytes that have been allocated.
Down here I'm going to switch over
to my call tree view by clicking
the icon in the bottom left.
And the call tree view shows me
all the objects that have been
allocated and their backtraces
for when these allocations occur.
And finally,
my diagram view shows me all the
objects that have been allocated
and their pointer histories.
For example, if I choose, let's say,
an NSLock and I click
this arrow right here,
it tells me precisely when the
NSLock has been allocated in memory.
All right.
Well, let's run our application and
see whether we can actually
use these tools to find leaks.
I'm going to bring it up here and
I'm going to hit choose images.
And I'm going to hit open.
So let's forget about Lease for a second,
and it seems like we have a
large memory spike over here
in our Object Alloc Instrument.
So it seems like a more
pressing issue than Lease,
and let's go in and
investigate it in more detail.
So I'm going to stop my application,
and I'm going to take a look
at why this is occurring.
So, first of all, I'm going to zoom in.
And as you can see, my working set,
my working memory set
is about 21 megabytes.
But in this region over here,
it seems that I'm accumulating a bunch
of allocated objects that are pushing
my memory up to about 100 megabytes,
which might reduce my performance if
my application starts paging to disk.
So if I want to investigate
this in more detail,
I want to do something
called time filtering.
And to do that,
I'm going to hit the option key,
I'm going to click and drag around
the area that I want to investigate.
If I switch back to my table view,
you realize that the data has been
refiltered and redrawn to show me
just the data that I've filtered for.
Now, I want to find which objects are
responsible for this large memory spike.
And to do that,
I'm actually going to go ahead
and go to the call tree view.
And see where these objects
have been allocated.
So I'm going to hit All Allocations.
I'm going to click the arrow.
I'm going to bring up the extended detail
view by clicking the icon in the bottom.
So if you can see,
it seems that most of my
objects have been allocated from
this method call in my code.
Enhanced controller,
thumbnail image for path with size.
And what this does,
it's creating an image from
the contents of a file,
and the NS image is going ahead and
creating an NS bitmap image rep.
So now we found out that NSBitmap
image reps are responsible
for about 100 megabytes worth
of allocations in my code.
So these are the objects
responsible for the spike.
Now, let's see what I'm doing in my
code to actually cause this spike.
I'm going to go back to this frame.
I'm going to double click it.
And as you can see, this is my thumbnail
image for path method.
And what it's doing is I'm
loading my original image,
my large image from file.
I'm using that large image over
here to create a thumbnail image.
And after I'm done creating
that thumbnail image,
I'm releasing my large image.
All right.
So I'm releasing this large image.
Why am I getting the large memory spike,
even though I'm releasing
the NSBitBap image rep?
To answer that question,
let's go back to Instruments
and move to the diagram view.
And find all the NSBitmap image reps that
have been allocated by my application.
So down here in the search field,
I'm going to type in NSBitmap image rep.
I'm going to find the one that
has been allocated from my code,
or any NSBitmap image rep
allocated from my code,
such as this one, for example.
I'm going to hit the arrow.
Now, as you can see in this view,
this is the pointer history
for NSBitmap image rep.
You can see where it's been allocated.
And if we scroll back up,
you can see when it's allocated,
it has a retain count of one.
And you can see when it's been retained,
released.
And this is when it's released
right before it's freed.
Now, as you can see,
the NSBitmap image rep is released
in an NSAutoReleasePool context,
which means that
When it's created,
it's placed in an NS auto release pool,
but as my application is running,
my run loop isn't flushing this
auto release pool in time for me to
get rid of that large memory spike.
So this is a very easy fix in order
to prevent the spike from happening.
If I go back to my code,
so if I go back over here, take this out.
Go back to my code by
double-clicking this frame.
I can fix this easily by encapsulating
or surrounding where I allocate
my large image or load it from
file with an NS auto-release pool
creation and release at the end.
So I'm going to save.
I'm going to build.
And I'm going to start
my application again.
So I'm going to hit record.
All right, let's see whether my memory
spike happens this time around.
I'm going to choose images, hit open.
So we've seen this
large memory allocation,
but let's compare it to the
previous run where we had our spike.
So if I go back to Instruments,
I'm actually going to stop
the application right now.
And in order to see your previous run,
all you need to do is pull
down this triangle right here.
And I'm going to actually zoom out so
you can see both runs on the same scale.
So do you see the large
memory spike over here?
And now it's been eliminated.
All right.
So now we've used the ObjectAlloc
instrument to tell us about
our memory working set,
and we used it to eliminate
this large memory spike.
But if we look down here,
it seems that we have a bunch of leaks.
My leaks instrument tells me that I'm
leaking a whole load of NSStrings.
So I want to find out where
I'm leaking the strings from.
So to do that,
I'm going to go back here and
click on my call tree view.
In my call tree view,
if I click on this frame right here,
it shows me that all of my leaked
strings that I've seen are being
leaked from this method call.
And it's Enhance, Control,
or Choose Images.
So let's investigate this in our code.
We double click.
You can see that what I'm doing
is I'm allocating a string,
but I'm never releasing it,
and this is causing my leak.
And the string here is just the
path name for the thumbnail.
So, in order to fix this problem,
all I need to do is
auto-release my string.
Save, hit Run,
start with Performance Tool, Weeks.
And here we go.
So, I'm going to open up
my application again.
Choose Images, hit Open,
and let's just wait for it and
see whether any leaks occur.
All right, so it seems that we
fixed our leaks problem.
And... or not.
It seems like I've just
built the wrong project.
Anyway, if... let's go see what sort
of leaks we have this time.
It seems we're still
leaking some strings,
but we've reduced the amount of strings
that we've leaked in the first time,
which was one problem we've solved.
Finding leaks is an iterative process.
So you could fix one leak and find
more leaks and keep iterating and
continuing to find all the leaks
that your application incurs.
All right.
So now that we've seen that how
to use the object alloc instrument
and the leaks instrument to find
some memory management issues,
if we could switch back to the slides,
please.
Let's talk about how Instruments can help
you analyze and leverage new technologies
that have emerged in Snow Leopard.
So, as you all know,
the number of cores in
our devices is increasing.
And if you want to write
better performing applications,
your goal is to keep
all these cores busy.
And to do that,
you need to write applications with
a higher degree of concurrency.
The current way to do
that is to use threads.
But as those of you who have
written multi-threaded code in
the past should agree with me,
threading is hard.
It's hard because explicit thread
management is difficult because you have
no knowledge of the underlying hardware.
And you might fall into the
trap of underutilizing your CPUs
because you don't know how many
threads to create that will scale
between one CPU versus eight CPUs.
If you're dealing with shared data,
you might face synchronization issues,
such as deadlocks and race conditions.
Finally, if you're dealing with threads,
you might face problems with blocking
API and contended memory access,
when two threads are trying to
read and write from the same
cache line at the same time.
So, if threading is hard,
and since you have no knowledge
of the underlying hardware,
but your system does,
then why can't your system
deal with threads for you?
While in Snow Leopard, it can.
As you've seen from Bertrand's talk,
Snow Leopard introduces a new
concurrency-oriented programming
model called Grand Central Dispatch.
This is in essence a new infrastructure
that provides you with simple API that
works with the operating system to
provide you with concurrency without the
previous obstacles that we talked about.
So how does it work?
Well,
it's based on the notion of a queue,
where a queue is an asynchronous
unit of concurrency.
What you need to do is you
need to divide your code up
into work units or work items.
And then add these work
items to the queue.
And then GCD goes ahead and executes
these items concurrently and assigns
the necessary threads that will
perform these actions without
you having to worry about them.
And with Instruments,
we've introduced a new
GCD instrument in Snow Leopard.
The GCD instrument records queue events,
such as the creation of a queue
and when a queue is deleted.
It also records when an item
has been added to a queue and
when it's been popped off and
when its work has been executed.
And it also keeps track of the number of
queues that are active versus inactive.
Now, active queues are defined as
queues that currently have items
on them that are executing,
versus inactive queues,
which are queues that have items on them,
but they aren't executing at this time.
In essence, the GCD instrument tells you
about the interaction of dispatch
queues with your application.
So let's take a look at the
GCD instrument in action.
If we switch over to the demo machine,
and I'm actually going
to switch over to the
There we go.
All right.
So, I'm going to bring out, bring,
launch Instruments, and as you can see,
I'm going to select the Dispatch
Instrument from my template chooser.
I'm going to hit choose.
And my target application over here,
I'm going to launch
GCD Mandelbrot and hit record.
So Mandelbrot is really a
fractal drawing application.
And the way it works
is that for each row,
I'm creating a new queue.
And for that queue, I'm pushing on items
that are 10 by 10 cells.
And GCD is taking care of rendering
these 10 by 10 cells for me.
So what I can do is I can zoom in,
and it re-renders.
Over here, I'll zoom in again.
And as you can see in the background,
I'm recording the active versus inactive
cues as my application is running.
So in the track view,
you can see the active cues in
red versus the inactive cues.
Let me just do it again.
Here we go.
Now let's go back, and this is what you
see in your track view.
If you take a look at your detail view,
it shows you all the queue
events that are occurring.
Like for example,
when you're creating queues,
when you're pushing items onto queue,
et cetera.
Now I could filter for,
I'm going to actually
stop my application first,
and I'm going to filter for queue create.
And you can see all the places
where my queues have been created.
For example, here I've created my
render at y equals 0 queue.
And down here I've created
my render at y equals 220.
Let me clear the filter.
And if I scroll down,
you can also see when Q work
items have been completed.
For example,
I've completed a work item at
Y equals 310 before I completed
a work item at Y equals 390.
And finally,
if you go to your call tree view,
And I'm going to select
separate by thread.
And you can see all the threads that
have been created by GCD in order to take
care of rendering this manual for you.
So this is an eight core machine,
and you can see that GCD has
created a whole bunch of threads.
And you see that some of the
threads made 308 calls versus
some threads that made 26 calls.
So we just saw how to use the
GCD instrument on Snow Leopard.
If we switch back to slides, please.
So now we've seen how
Instruments can simplify the
performance analysis for you.
And let's talk about how it integrates
seamlessly into your workflow.
So as you've seen,
I can run Instruments directly from
Xcode by selecting the Run menu and
then selecting Start Performance Tool.
And then I can select any one of these
templates to start Instruments with.
You can also launch Instruments
from using Quick Start Keys.
Now, sometimes you might face performance
problems that are transient,
which appear and disappear suddenly.
And with Quick Start Keys,
Instruments does not have to be running.
All you need to do is to place
your cursor over that application,
hit a Quick Start Key,
and Instruments would launch with
the selected template that you've
assigned for that Quick Start Key.
And you can assign these
Quick Start Keys in the
Preferences pane of Instruments.
Third way you can launch Instruments
is from the command line.
All you need to do is specify
the template to use and the
target PID or application and
launch Instruments right away.
And in addition to integrating
seamlessly into your workflow,
you can also customize
instruments as well.
You can create your own custom templates.
For example,
you've selected a group of instruments
you want to use together and you
want to save that for later use.
You can go to the File menu
and hit Save as Template,
and you'll be prompted
with a save dialog,
and you can save that template
that you've chosen for later use.
You can also run
Instruments in mini mode,
which will save you the overhead
of the graphical interface.
Finally,
you can use multiple graph styles
to plot the data in the track view.
In this case,
you see the block graph style,
the point graph style,
and the filled line graph style.
The bottom line is,
Instruments simplifies your performance
analysis because it integrates
seamlessly into your workflow.
Now, even though it's simple,
it still retains the breadth and
depth that allows you to write
competitive and compelling apps.
And with that,
I hope you all enjoyed this session.
If you have any questions,
please don't hesitate to
email Michael Jurwitz.
He's our developer tools evangelist.
For more information about Instruments
and Instrument documentation,
that can be found in
the Xcode documentation.
And finally,
for more information about DTrace,
you should go ahead and
check out Sun's website.
It has a comprehensive guide to DTrace.
Now, if you're really interested in GCD,
I really recommend the session
right after this in North Beach.
And I believe the title on this is wrong,
but it's session 382.
And if you're interested in how
to use Instruments to debug and
profile iPhone applications,
I also really recommend the session
at 10.30 on Thursday in Presidio.
And there are two more sessions about
DTrace that you can see up there.
And finally,
we'd like you to come talk to us
and tell us about your problems,
and we will help you with
your performance problems
and how to use Instruments.
We're going to be in the labs right
after this in OS X Foundation Lab C.
We're also going to be in labs
tomorrow at the time shown.